Jed's List of Situation Puzzles
(last updated: 18 July 1999.)



Introduction

   In the game of situation puzzles, a mysterious situation is presented to
a group of players, who must then try to find out what's going on by asking
further questions.  The person who initially presented the situation can
only answer "yes" or "no" to questions (or occasionally "irrelevant").

   My list of situation puzzles consists of two sections.  Section 1
consists of puzzles which are set in a realistic world; the situations could
all actually occur.  Section 2 consists of puzzles which involve double
meanings for one or more words and those which could not possibly take place
in reality as we know it, plus a few miscellaneous others.  Note that a
puzzle's number in this edition may not be the same as its number in earlier
editions.

   See the end of the list for more notes and comments.

   The answers to these puzzles are available in a separate file, most
likely very close to where you found this puzzle list.



Section 1: "Realistic" situation puzzles

1.1.  A man goes into a restaurant, orders abalone, eats one bite, and kills
himself.  (TeM and JM wording)

1.2.  A man lives on the twelfth floor of an apartment building.  Every
morning he takes the elevator down to the lobby and leaves the building.  In
the evening, he gets into the elevator, and, if there is someone else in the
elevator -- or if it was raining that day -- he goes back to his floor
directly.  However, if there is nobody else in the elevator and it hasn't
rained, he goes to the tenth floor and walks up two flights of stairs to his
room.  (MH, from _How Come?_)

1.3.  A man sitting on a park bench reads a newspaper article headlined
"Death at Sea" and knows a murder has been committed.  (from _How Come?_)

1.4.  A man lets go of a bowling ball.  A short while later, he is rushed to
the hospital.  (JC original?)

1.5.  Two men enter a bar.  They both order identical drinks.  One lives;
the other dies.  (CR; partial JM wording)

1.6.  A man walks into a bar and asks for a drink.  The bartender pulls out
a gun and points it at him.  The man says, "Thank you," and walks out. 
(DVS; from _How Come?_)

1.7.  Two women are talking.  One goes into the bathroom, comes out five
minutes later, and kills the other.

1.8.  Beulah died in the Appalachians, while Craig died at sea.  Everyone
was much happier with Craig's death.  (JM, originally from _How Come --
Again?_)

1.9.  An avid birdwatcher sees an unexpected bird.  Soon he's dead.  (RSB
original)

1.10.  He was killed by breakfast.  (JM original)

1.11.  Two brothers are involved in a murder.  Though it's clear that one of
them actually committed the crime, neither can be punished.  (This is
different from #1.78.)  (from "Unreasonable Doubt," by Stanley Ellin)

1.12.  A woman in France in 1959 is waiting in her room, with all the doors
locked from the inside, for her husband to come home.  When he arrives, the
house has burned to the ground and she's dead.  (JM, originally from _How
Come -- Again?_)

1.13.  A man lies dead next to a cactus. Stuck to the cactus is a slip of
paper.  (TO)

1.14.  Passing by a window, you see two dead men in a room, with a gun and a
deck of cards.  (KK2)

1.15.  There are a carrot, a pile of pebbles, and a pipe lying together in
the middle of a field.  (PRO; partial JM wording)

1.16.  Two dead people sit in their cars on a street.  (AG)

1.17.  A man is found shot to death in the front seat of his car; a gun lies
out of his reach in the back seat.  All the windows are closed and the doors
are locked; there are no bullet holes anywhere in the car.  (SP, from _The
Next Book of OMNI Games_; partial AC wording)

1.18.  A man is sitting in a room. Another person enters, carrying a closed
cardboard box, and sits down nearby. Though the first man can't see, hear,
or smell the box's contents, he knows what's in the box.  (ES original)

1.19.  There is blood on the ceiling of my bedroom.  (MI original)

1.20.  A man in uniform stands on the beach of a tropical island.  He takes
out a cigarette, lights it, and begins smoking.  He takes out a letter and
begins reading it.  The cigarette burns down between his fingers, but he
doesn't throw it away.  He cries.  (RW)

1.21.  A woman is heating her coffee in a small microwave oven.  She puts it
in for exactly two minutes.  She then opens the door, closes it, then heats
her coffee for two more seconds.  (JC original?)

1.22.  A man tries the new cologne his wife gave him for his birthday.  He
goes out to get some food, and is killed.  (RW original)

1.23.  A man takes a two-week cruise to Mexico from the U.S.  Shortly after
he gets back, he takes a three-day cruise which doesn't stop at any other
ports.  He stays in his cabin all the time on both cruises.  As a result, he
makes $250,000.  (MI, from "The Wager")

1.24.  A man is lying face down, dead, in the desert, with a match near his
outstretched hand.  (This is different from #1.25, #2.2, and #2.12.)  (JH;
partial JM wording)

1.25.  A man is lying, dead, face down in the desert wearing a backpack. 
(This is different from #1.24, #2.2, and #2.12.)

1.26.  She lost her job when she invited them to dinner.  (DS original)

1.27.  A man tells his boss, "Don't take your planned flight today!  I had a
dream last night that if you do, your plane will crash and you'll die."  The
boss fires the man.  (From _How Come?_)

1.28.  A man finishes getting dressed, lies down and dies.  (CH original?)

1.29.  Every day a man drinks his breakfast and drinks his lunch.  When his
boss finds out, he is immediately fired.  The man moves to another job and
begins doing the same thing; this time, when his boss finds out, the boss
jokingly tells him that he'll be fired if he stops.  (RSW)

1.30.  A car without a driver moves; a man dies.  (EMS)

1.31.  A man gets onto an elevator.  When the elevator stops, he knows his
wife is dead.  (LA; partial KH wording)

1.32.  A man is killed on a train.  He is found to have written "elf" on the
floor in his own blood.  (MB, from "The Problem of the Locked Caboose," by
Edward D. Hoch)

1.33.  A man lies dead next to a feather.  (PRO)

1.34.  A man ran into a fire, and lived.  A man stayed where there was no
fire, and died.  (EW original)

1.35.  Four people are on a grass-covered island.  A fire burns from one end
of the island to the other, but no one gets severely burnt.  (BJ)

1.36.  A flash of light, a man dies.  (ST original)

1.37.  A man is running along a corridor with a piece of paper in his hand. 
The lights flicker and the man drops to his knees and cries out, "Oh no!" 
(MP)

1.38.  Mr. Browning is glad the car ran out of gas.  (JM, originally from
_How Come -- Again?_)

1.39.  A dying man gives another man a gift, and then the dying man dies. 
Shortly after that the second man dies.  (HJS)

1.40.  A man is lying dead in a room.  There is a large pile of gold and
jewels on the floor, a chandelier attached to the ceiling, and a large open
window.  (DVS; partial JM wording)

1.41.  A man enters the elevator of a high rise apartment building, takes
off one glove, and pushes the button for the tenth floor.  The next day, the
same man enters the elevator, *puts on* one glove, and pushes the button for
the tenth floor. (RA original)

1.42.  A woman came home with a bag of groceries, got the mail, and walked
into the house.  On the way to the kitchen, she went through the living room
and looked at her husband, who had blown his brains out.  She then continued
to the kitchen, put away the groceries, and made dinner. (partial JM
wording; from _How Come?_)

1.43.  The king dies and two men both claim to be his long-lost son.  One of
the king's advisors proposes a test to determine the identity of the true
heir.  One claimant agrees to the test; the other refuses.  The one who
agreed is sent packing; the one who refused is identified as the rightful
heir.  (SP, from _The Next Book of OMNI Games_; earlier from _How Come?_)

1.44.  An old man gets the hiccups.  Soon, he is rushed to the hospital. 
(JC original?)

1.45.  A man is found dead outside a large building with a hole in him. (JM,
modified from PRO)

1.46.  A man dies in his own home.  (ME original)

1.47.  A body is discovered in a park in Chicago in the middle of summer. 
It has a fractured skull and many other broken bones, but the cause of death
was hypothermia.  (MI, from _Hill Street Blues_)

1.48.  Three men die.  On the pavement are pieces of ice and broken glass.
(JJ)

1.49.  If he had wanted chocolate ice cream, his brother would be alive
today.  (TiM original)

1.50.  A man kills his wife, then goes inside his house and kills himself.
(DH original, from "Nightmare in Yellow," by Fredric Brown)

1.51.  If he'd turned on the light, he'd have lived.  (JM)

1.52.  A man is found dead on the floor in the living room.  (ME original)

1.53.  A man went into a restaurant, had a large meal, and paid nothing for
it.  (JM original)

1.54.  A U.S. Navy sailor on the deck of a cruiser noticed an explosive mine
in the water directly in the path of the ship.  With no time to communicate
the situation to the captain of the ship, the sailor saved the lives of the
crew and the ship.  (BB)

1.55.  A man leaves a motel room, goes to his car, and honks the horn.  (AS
original)

1.56.  As I drive to work on my motorcycle, there is one corner which I go
around at a certain speed whether it's rainy or sunny.  If it's cloudy but
not raining, however, I usually go faster.  (SW original)

1.57.  A man opens his mouth and dies shortly afterwards.

1.58.  A married couple goes to a movie.  During the movie the husband
strangles the wife.  He is able to get her body home without attracting
attention.  (from _Beyond the Easy Answer_; earlier from _How Come?_)

1.59.  Music stops and a woman dies.  (DVS)

1.60.  Abel walks out of the ocean.  Cain asks him who he is, and Abel
answers.  Cain kills Abel.  (MWD original)

1.61.  A man is riding a subway.  He meets a one-armed man, who pulls out a
gun and shoots him.  (SJ; from _How Come?_)

1.62.  An ordinary American citizen, with no passport, visits over thirty
foreign countries in one day.  He is welcomed in each country, and leaves
each one of his own accord.  (PRO)

1.63.  A man is sitting in bed.  He makes a phone call, saying nothing, and
then goes to sleep.  (SJ; from _How Come?_)

1.64.  A man tries to buy poison to kill his wife.  The pharmacist figures
out what he's up to and finds a way to ensure that he can't kill his wife. 
(CB, from _Flitterwochen in der Hoelle_)

1.65.  A man was walking down a road when a stone lodged itself between his
foot and his sandal.  He leaned against a pole and, with his head down to
watch, he shook his foot to dislodge the stone.  Another man came up and
broke the first man's arm in three places.  (RB)

1.66.  A man is sitting suspended over two pressurized containers. Suddenly,
he dies.  (NK original)

1.67.  A man is dead in a puddle of blood and water on the floor of a locked
room.  (This is different from #1.68.)

1.68.  A man is found hanging in a locked room with a puddle of water under
his feet.  (This is different from #1.67.)

1.69.  Mr. H meets Mr. X in a hotel bar; after a heated discussion, they
leave the bar and head upstairs.  Partway up the stairs, Mr. X clutches his
chest, then punches Mr. H in the face.

1.70.  A man driving his car turns on the radio.  He then pulls over to the
side of the road and shoots himself.  (This is different from #1.71.)

1.71.  A man is driving his car.  He turns on the radio, listens for five
minutes, turns around, goes home, and shoots his wife.  (This is different
from #1.70.)  (From _How Come?_)

1.72.  She grabbed his ring, pulled on it, and dropped it.  (JM, from _Math
for Girls_)

1.73.  A riverboat filled with passengers suddenly capsized, drowning most
of those aboard.  (originally from _How Come -- Again?_)

1.74.  A woman walks into a small room and screams.  (NP)

1.75.  A rope breaks.  A bell rings.  A man dies.  (KH)

1.76.  Joe leaves his house, wearing a mask and carrying an empty sack.  An
hour later he returns.  The sack is now full.  He goes into a room and turns
out the lights.  (AL)

1.77.  A woman buys a new pair of shoes, goes to work, and dies.  (DM)

1.78.  A woman has incontrovertible proof in court that her husband was
murdered by her sister.  The judge declares, "This is the strangest case
I've ever seen.  Though it's a cut-and-dried case, this woman cannot be
punished."  (This is different from #1.11.)  (MH; from _How Come?_)

1.79.  Hans and Fritz are German spies during World War II.  They try to
enter America, posing as returning tourists.  Hans is immediately arrested.
(JM, originally from _How Come -- Again?_)

1.80.  A man is found dead on a path 200 feet from a gate.  Other than his
clothes, all he had with him was a stick. (KO original)

1.81.  A man is found dead in an alley lying in a red pool with two sticks
crossed near his head.  (PRO)

1.82.  A married couple was speeding into town when their sedan ran out of
gas.  The man went for help after making sure his wife closed the windows
and locked the doors of the car.  Upon his return, he found his wife dead
and a stranger in the car.  The windows were still closed, the doors were
still locked, and no damage was done to the car.  (SP, from _The Next Book
of OMNI Games_; earlier from _How Come?_)

1.83.  A woman lies dead in the street near a car.  (AG)

1.84.  Tim and Greg were talking.  Tim said "The terror of flight."  Greg
said "The gloom of the grave."  Greg was arrested.  (MPW original, from "No
Refuge Could Save," by Isaac Asimov)

1.85.  A woman throws something out a window and dies.  (JM)

1.86.  A man is found dead in his parked car.  Tire tracks lead up to the
car and away.  (SD; from _How Come?_)

1.87.  A man is returning from Switzerland by train.  If he had been in a
non-smoking car he would have died.  (DVS; MC wording)

1.88.  Two men are digging a trench.  They look at each other and start to
argue.  They make a phone call.  One man leaves for home and the other
angrily continues to dig.  (JC original?)

1.89.  Two men are kidnapped and are placed in the trunk of a car.  The next
morning, when the trunk is opened, one man is alive and the other is dead.

1.90.  A man urinates and dies.  (RA original)

1.91.  A man wakes up one night to get some water.  He turns off the light
and goes back to bed.  The next morning he looks out the window, screams,
and kills himself.  (CR; KK wording; originally from _How Come -- Again?_)

1.92.  A man is dead in a room with a small pile of pieces of wood and
sawdust in one corner.  (from "Coroner's Inquest," by Marc Connelly;
earlier(?) from _How Come?_)

1.93.  Two men are dead next to a pile of wood and a rope.  (JC original?)

1.94.  A writer with an audience of millions insisted that he was never to
be interrupted while writing.  After the day when he actually was
interrupted, he never wrote again.  (JM, originally from _How Come --
Again?_)

1.95.  In the middle of the ocean is a yacht.  Several corpses are floating
in the water nearby.  (SJ)



Section 2: Double meanings, fictional settings, and miscellaneous others

2.1.  A man is born in 1972 and dies in 1952 at the age of 25.  (DM)

2.2.  A man is found dead in the arctic with a pack on his back.  (This is
different from #1.25, #1.24, and #2.12.)  (PRO)

2.3.  A man pushes a car up to a hotel and tells the owner he's bankrupt.
(DVS; partial AL and JM wording)

2.4.  A man lies dead in a room with fifty-three bicycles in front of him.

2.5.  A black man dressed all in black, wearing a black mask, stands at a
crossroads in a totally black-painted town.  All of the streetlights in town
are broken.  There is no moon.  A black-painted car without headlights
drives straight toward him, but turns in time and doesn't hit him.  (AL and
RM wording; from _How Come?_)

2.6.  Bob and Carol and Ted and Alice all live in the same house.  Bob and
Carol go out to a movie, and when they return, Alice is lying dead on the
floor in a puddle of water and glass.  It is obvious that Ted killed her but
Ted is not prosecuted or severely punished.  (From _How Come?_)

2.7.  A dead man lies near a pile of bricks and a beetle on top of a book.
(MN)

2.8.  Hiking in the mountains, you walk past a large field and camp a few
miles farther on, at a stream.  It snows in the night, and the next day you
find a cabin in the field with two dead bodies inside.  (KL; KD and partial
JM wording)

2.9.  Two people are playing cards.  One looks around and realizes he's
going to die.  (JM original)

2.10.  A man was brought before a tribal chief, who asked him a question. 
If he had known the answer, he probably would have died.  He didn't, and
lived. (MWD original)

2.11.  A very rich man hires a poor man to clean one wing of his extravagant
domicile. The poor man, wanting to impress his new boss, cleans the entire
house. Soon after, the man quits his job.  (JC original?)

2.12.  There is a dead man lying in the desert next to a rock.  (This is
different from #1.25, #1.24, and #2.2.)  (GH)

2.13.  A woman opens an envelope and dyes.  (AL)

2.14.  He was killed because of poor eyesight.  (JM original, from an Arthur
C. Clarke story in _Tales from the White Hart_)

2.15.  A man rides into town on Friday.  He stays one night and leaves on
Friday.  (KK)

2.16.  A horse jumps over a tower and lands on a man, who disappears.  (ES
original)

2.17.  Two men are found dead outside of an igloo.  (SK original)

2.18.   A man is alone on an island with no food and no water, yet he does
not fear for his life.  (MN)

2.19.  A man marries twenty women in his village but isn't charged with
polygamy.

2.20.  Joe wants to go home, but he can't go home because the man in the
mask is waiting for him.  (AL wording)

2.21.  Bruce wins the race, but he gets no trophy.  (EMS)

2.22.  A woman meets the king, cries "Pain!", and loses consciousness.  (MI
original)

2.23.  As a man jumps out of a window, he hears the telephone ring and
regrets having jumped.  (from "Some Days are Like That," by Bruce J.
Balfour; partial JM wording)

2.24.  A newspaper reported that Jacques Dubois finished first in a race
held in France.  His average speed was given, correctly, as 19,475 km/hour. 
(DA, from an idea by AR and Richard Fowell)

2.25.  At the bottom of the sea there lies a ship worth millions of dollars
that will never be recovered.  (TF original)

2.26.  A man shoots himself, and dies.  (HL) (This is different from #2.27.)

2.27.  A man walks into a room, shoots, and kills himself.  (HL) (This is
different from #2.26.)

2.28.  Adults are holding children, waiting their turn.  The children are
handed (one at a time, usually) to a man, who holds them while a woman
shoots them.  If the child is crying, the man tries to stop the crying
before the child is shot.  (ML)

2.29.  Harry dropped a sugar cube in his coffee, then lifed it out intact a
minute later. (_Math for Girls_)

2.30.  A man is doing his job when his suit tears.  Fifteen minutes later,
he's dead.  (RM; from _How Come?_)

2.31.  A train pulls into a station, but none of the waiting passengers
move. (MN)

2.32.  Three large people try to crowd under one small umbrella, but nobody
gets wet.  (CC)

2.33.  An ordinary woman walks on water. (_Math for Girls_)

2.34.  Amy drives her car due west for a quarter mile, without turning. 
When she stops, the car is facing east.  (_Math for Girls_)



Attributions key

   When I know who first told me the current version of a puzzle, I've put
initials in parentheses after the puzzle statement; this is the key to those
acknowledgments.  The word "original" following an attribution means that,
to the best of my knowledge, the cited person invented that puzzle.  If a
given puzzle isn't marked "original" but is attributed, that just means
that's the first person I heard it from.  Please don't remove attributions
from original puzzles.

   Items cited as from _How Come?_ may or may not have been original to
Agnes Rogers and her friends, but that's almost certainly the first book in
which these items saw print.  Items cited as originally from _How Come --
Again?_ are all original to Agnes Rogers and Richard G. Sheehan.

LA:  Laura Almasy
RA:  Russell Ang
DA:  Dmitry Apresian
RSB:  Ranjit S. Bhatnagar
CB:  Cici Beilken
RB:  Rex Boggs
BB:  Bob Bondi
MB:  Mark Brader
AC:  Adam Carlson
JC:  Jeff Chen
CC:  Chris Cole
MC:  Matt Crawford
JD:  John Dalbec
MWD:  Matthew William Daly
KD:  Ken Duisenberg
SD:  Sylvia Dutcher
ME:  Marguerite Eisenstein
FF:  Fil Feit
TRF:  Tammy R. Franklin
TF:  Thomas Freeman
AG:  Andreas Gammel
JH:  Joaquin Hartman
MH:  Marcy Hartman
KH:  Karl Heuer
CH:  Craig Holland
GH:  Geoff Hopcraft
DH:  David Huddleston
MI:  Mark Isaak
SJ:  Steve Jacquot
MJ:  Mike Jarvis
JJ:  J|rgen Jensen
BJ:  Bill Jordan
KK:  Karen Karp
KK2:  Kathleen Kim
NK:  Nev King
SK:  Shelby Kilmer
TK:  Tal Kubo
KL:  Ken Largman
AL:  Andy Latto
HL:  Howard Lazoff
ML:  Merlyn LeRoy
JKM:  John K. Miller
DM:  Dan Murray
RM:  "Reaper Man" (real name unknown)
TeM:  Ted McCabe
TiM:  Tim MacDonald
JM:  Jim Moskowitz
DM:  Damian Mulvena
MN:  Jan Mark Noworolski
KO:  Kevin O'Connor
TO:  Tobias Oetiker
PRO:  Peter R. Olpe (from his list)
NP:  Neil Pawson
MP:  Martin Pitwood
SP:  Scott Purdy
CR:  Charles Renert
EMS:  Ellen M. Sentovich (from her list)
AS:  Annie Senghas
HJS:  H. J. Simpson
ES:  Eric Stephan
DS:  Diana Stiefbold
BGT:  "Brad" (full name unknown)
ST:  Simon Travaglia
DVS:  David Van Stone
TV:  Tim Vaughan
RSW:  R. Serena Wakefield
EW:  Eric Wang
WW:  Warwick
RW:  Randy Whitaker
MPW:  Matthew P Wiener
SW:  Steve Wilson (not sure of name)
DW:  Don Woods


Special thanks to Jim Moskowitz, Karl Heuer, and Mark Brader, for a lot of
discussion of small but important details and wording.



Notes and comments

   My outtakes list (items submitted but not included on this list for
various reasons) is available in a separate file.

   There are many possible wordings for most of the puzzles in this list.
Most of them have what I consider the best wording of the variants I've
heard; if you have better phrasings, or if you have any other comments or
suggestions, please drop a note to logos@kith.org.  If you know other
situation puzzles not on this list, please send them to me (but you may want
to read through all the answers first; I may already have listed your puzzle
in the answer list, as a variant of an item already on the list).

   In telling a group of players one of these situations, you can add or
remove details, either to make getting the answer harder or easier, or
simply to throw in red herrings.

   Note that situation puzzles are interactive games -- that's what
distinguishes them from riddles or logic puzzles.  Just reading the
questions on the Web or in a text file and trying to guess the answers
directly is much less interesting than trying to solve the puzzles by a
gradual approach of gathering information.  Use the list as a resource, but
play the game with other people.

   Situation puzzles are also known by a variety of other names: mystery
questions, story riddles, lateral thinking puzzles, mini-mysteries, minute
mysteries, missing links, how come?, situational puzzles, law school
puzzles, quistels (in parts of Europe), mystery puzzles, albatross stories,
Intrigue puzzles, Who Dunnits, Please Explains, monkey puzzles, two-minute
mysteries, conundrums, computer games, and so on.  I prefer the term
"situation puzzles," which was once the standard term for them on the
rec.puzzles newsgroup.



Contact Info

Please send updates, additions, and suggestions to Jed Hartman at
logos@kith.org.
